Dischord is a system of two one-dimensional cellular automata that work together to form an audiovisual experience. Both cellular automata are driven by an algorithm based on one found at http://www.stephenwolfram.com/publications/cellular-automata-complexity/pdfs/random-sequence-generation-cellular-automata.pdf; it creates sequences of states that can't be reproduced without the seed and rules, except by NP processes. The visuals are created with a series of constantly-shifting foreground and background colors, drawn in randomized patterns of rectangles behind the representations of the automata.

By using this randomization algorithm, I attempt to provide the viewer with near-maximal information and, therefore, entropy. The goal is to envelop the observer in layers of discordant sound and color, capturing the mind and creating a state of rumination. Reaching an introspective mindset is made easier by the incorporation of such a piece.

Dischord is a work that is, to an extent, emotionally confusing for me. On one hand, I identify with Stockhausen in that I want to keep things fresh and new, never predictable. On the other, too much stochasticity can make a piece boring, perhaps even more than having it completely composed. I attempt to strike a balance between the two, using cellular automata to generate the notes and note lengths, but limiting the types of chords that can be played and adding heavy reverb so that chords overlap and flow together. In this way, I try to reconcile randomness and predictability into a cohesive ambient work.

Visually, I have kept the automata minimalistic and out of the way, so that the viewer can observe the ebbing and flowing colors without being jarred by the presence of too many moving parts. The controls and description, too, are designed to be unobtrusive, fading after a few seconds of mouse stillness.

Dischord, then, is a piece to get lost in, a cave in which to meditate. By picking a scale, a base frequency, and a speed, the viewer can immerse him- or herself in the notes, the color, and the shifting patterns and combinations of practically unique and unreproducible sensatory experience. The pace and style of the undertaking is up to you; I invite you to lose your way in Dischord.